docs(k8s): update upgrade docs (#1740)
scaleway/docs-content: containers/kubernetes/how-to/upgrade-kubernetes-version.mdx

---
meta:
  title: How to upgrade the Kubernetes version on a Kapsule cluster
  description: This page explains how to upgrade the Kubernetes version on a Kapsule cluster
content:
  h1: How to upgrade the Kubernetes version on a Kapsule cluster
  paragraph: This page explains how to upgrade the Kubernetes version on a Kapsule cluster
tags: kubernetes kubernetes-kapsule kapsule cluster upgrade
dates:
  validation: 2023-06-01
  posted: 2022-12-21
categories:
  - kubernetes
---

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

> You can either upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster [directly from the Scaleway console](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-from-the-scaleway-console), or upgrade your cluster to the next minor version by [using the CLI](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-to-the-next-minor-version-using-the-cli).

Author: ```suggestion
You can either upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster [directly from the Scaleway console](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-from-the-scaleway-console), or upgrade your cluster to the next minor version by [using the CLI](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-to-the-next-minor-version-using-the-cli). The CLI section of this how-to guide also provides very helpful tips for checking important components before proceeding with the upgrade from your cluster.
```

> You can [apply the latest patches](#applying-patches-to-your-cluster-from-the-scaleway-console) to your Kubernetes cluster directly from the Scaleway console. If you want to [upgrade your cluster to the next minor release](#upgrading-to-the-next-minor-version-using-the-cli), you can achieve this using the CLI.

Reviewer: The console can also upgrade to the next minor release, not just latest patches. 
But the CLI section of this tutorial however provides very helpful tips for checking important components before proceeding.

> You can either upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster [directly from the Scaleway console](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-from-the-scaleway-console), or upgrade your cluster to the next minor version by [using the CLI](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-to-the-next-minor-version-using-the-cli). The CLI section of this how-to guide also provides very helpful tips for checking important components before proceeding with the upgrade from your cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can either upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster [directly from the Scaleway console](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-from-the-scaleway-console), or upgrade your cluster to the next minor version by [using the CLI](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-to-the-next-minor-version-using-the-cli). The CLI section of this how-to guide also provides tips for checking important components before proceeding with the upgrade of your cluster.
```

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

> You can either upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster [directly from the Scaleway console](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-from-the-scaleway-console), or upgrade your cluster to the next minor version by [using the CLI](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-to-the-next-minor-version-using-the-cli). The CLI section of this how-to guide also provides tips for checking important components before proceeding with the upgrade of your cluster.

Reviewer 3: these are not 'tips' but mandatory constraints

Author: ```suggestion
You can either upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster [directly from the Scaleway console](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-from-the-scaleway-console), or upgrade your cluster to the next minor version by [using the CLI](#upgrading-a-kapsule-cluster-to-the-next-minor-version-using-the-cli). The CLI section of this how-to guide also provides additional mandatory information for checking important components before proceeding with the upgrade of your cluster.
```

Reviewer: my bad I wrote "tips" earlier for a lack of finding a better word.

    <Message type="important">
      Be careful when upgrading the Kubernetes versions of your node pools, as it may lead to data loss on data stored locally on any node.
    </Message>
 5. Click **Upgrade**.
    <Message type="note">
      It is not possible to downgrade your Kubernetes version once it has been upgraded. 
    </Message>

## Upgrading a Kapsule cluster to the next minor version using the CLI

<Message type="requirement">
    - You have a working [CLI](https://github.com/scaleway/scaleway-cli) with your credentials set up
    - You are willing to upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster to the latest k8s version available on the Kapsule API.
</Message>

> To begin, it is essential to verify that the most recent version of Kapsule adequately supports your workload. We maintain a compatibility matrix for various components, as your current cluster might use components deprecated or unavailable in the latest version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, it is essential to verify that the most recent version of Kapsule adequately supports your workload. We maintain a compatibility matrix for various components, as your current cluster might use components that are deprecated or unavailable in the latest version.
```

For further details, please consult our [version policy](https://www.scaleway.com/en/docs/containers/kubernetes/reference-content/version-support-policy/).

> We recommend you read the Kubernetes [changelog](https://kubernetes.io/releases/) to stay informed on the latest version upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend you read the Kubernetes [changelog](https://kubernetes.io/releases/) to stay informed on the latest version upgrades.
```

### Checking which components must be changed

Run the following command into your terminal to retrieve a list of the components that need to be changed.

```
scw k8s version list
```

You should get an output similar to the following, providing a list of all relevant components:
```
1.25.9   [cilium calico kilo]                [none]                 [containerd]
1.24.13  [cilium calico weave flannel kilo]  [none]                 [containerd crio]
1.23.17  [cilium calico weave flannel kilo]  [none nginx traefik2]  [containerd crio docker]
```

> ### Ingresses

Reviewer 2: Is it right that this is plural?

Author: I think so - but I will change it to ### Ingress controllers maybe?

You can also deploy an Ingress Controller by yourself and fine-tune its settings according to your needs.

Run the `scw k8s cluster update $CLUSTER_ID ingress=none` command to update a cluster to a version superior to 1.23. It is necessary to deactivate the managed Ingress Controller.

### Container runtimes

We only provide support for `containerd` from version 1.25 and above. To migrate your existing pools, you must create new Kapsule pools with `containerd` as a runtime.
Complete the following steps to do so:
1. Create the pool:
    ```sh
    scw k8s pool create container-runtime=containerd zone=$POOL_ZONE size=$SIZE_OF_YOUR_OLD_POOL version=$YOUR_CLUSTER_VERSION cluster-id=$CLUSTER_ID
    ```
2. Wait for the nodes to be provisioned:
    ```sh
    scw k8s pool wait $POOL_ID
    ```
3. In parallel, you can start cordoning nodes using the old runtime. This way, the workload will get rescheduled directly on the `containerd` nodes.
    ```sh
    kubectl cordon $OLD_NODE_A $OLD_NODE_B $OLD_NODE_C ...
    ```

> 4. Once the new nodes are ready, you can start draining the old nodes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Start draining the old nodes once the new nodes are ready:
```

    <Message type="note">
      You may need to add the option `--delete-emptydir-data` if you used local disk as a scratchpad.
    </Message>
    ```sh
    kubectl drain --ignore-daemonsets $NODE_TO_DRAIN
    ```
    <Message type="important">
      **Do not** drain all the nodes simultaneously. Make sure to do it sequentially, while checking whether your workload is behaving as expected.
    </Message>

> 5. At this point, nodes from your old pool should be emptied of any workload. If so, they are ready for deletion:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Delete nodes from your old pool, since at this point, they should be emptied of any workload:
```

For more help, check out the following resources:
- The #k8s channel on our [Slack community](https://scaleway-community.slack.com)
- Our [support ticketing system](/console/my-account/how-to/open-a-support-ticket/)

### Effective upgrade

From here, two options are available: you are either upgrading **one minor version** or **multiple ones**.

#### One minor version

This option is the most straightforward and requires you to first upgrade your control-plane.
```sh
scw k8s cluster upgrade $CLUSTER_ID version=$NEW_K8S_VERSION
```

<Message type="tip">
  You can also upgrade the pools by appending the previous command with `upgrade-pools=true`.
</Message>

Additionally, you can upgrade one pool independently by running the following command:
```sh
scw k8s pool upgrade $POOL_ID version=$NEW_K8S_VERSION
```

If you wish to migrate your workload manually, you can do so by following the steps described in the [runtimes](#container-runtimes) section.
<Message type="important">
  Make sure to adapt the pool creation step.
</Message>
```sh
scw k8s pool create zone=$OLD_POOL_ZONE size=$SIZE_OF_YOUR_OLD_POOL version=$NEW_CLUSTER_VERSION cluster-id=$CLUSTER_ID
```

> Monitor your workload, congrats you are using a newer, maybe the latest Kubernetes version.

Reviewer 2: This line seems weird, maybe it could be deleted?

Author: ```suggestion
```

> #### Multiple minors versions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Multiple minor versions
```

> The process is quite similar to the previous one except you need to repeat the steps for each minor version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the previous process, but repeat the steps for each minor version.
```

    <Message type="important">
      Be careful when upgrading the Kubernetes versions of your node pools, as it may lead to data loss on data stored locally on any node.
    </Message>
 5. Click **Upgrade**.
    <Message type="note">
      It is not possible to downgrade your Kubernetes version once it has been upgraded. 
    </Message>

## Upgrading to the next minor version using the CLI

<Message type="requirement">
    - You have a working [CLI](https://github.com/scaleway/scaleway-cli) with your credentials set up
    - You are willing to upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster to the latest k8s version available on the Kapsule API.

>     you're willing to upgrade it.

Reviewer: Repeated line?

### Effective upgrade

From here, two options are available: you are either upgrading **one minor version** or **multiple ones**.

#### One minor version

This option is the most straightforward and requires you to first upgrade your control-plane.
```sh
scw k8s cluster upgrade $CLUSTER_ID version=$NEW_K8S_VERSION
```

<Message type="tip">
  You can also upgrade the pools by appending the previous command with `upgrade-pools=true`.
</Message>

Additionally, you can upgrade one pool independently by running the following command:
```sh
scw k8s pool upgrade $POOL_ID version=$NEW_K8S_VERSION
```

If you wish to migrate your workload manually, you can do so by following the steps described in the [runtimes](#container-runtimes) section.
<Message type="important">
  Make sure to adapt the pool creation step.
</Message>
```sh
scw k8s pool create zone=$OLD_POOL_ZONE size=$SIZE_OF_YOUR_OLD_POOL version=$NEW_CLUSTER_VERSION cluster-id=$CLUSTER_ID
```

Monitor your workload, congrats you are using a newer, maybe the latest Kubernetes version.

#### Multiple minors versions

The process is quite similar to the previous one except you need to repeat the steps for each minor version.

> <Message type="important">

Reviewer 3: this message can be removed as it is now enforced by the API
